The opening day of the 2011 Atlantic hurricane season June 1 was marked by a small area of disturbed weather that brought wind and rain to Pinellas County.

The National Hurricane Center gives odds of 10 percent that the weather system will become a tropical cyclone within the next 48 hours. The system was located over the far northeastern Gulf of Mexico traveling west-southwest at 25 mph.

The NHC also was watching a nearly-stationary system located over the southwestern and west-central Caribbean Sea. Forecasters said some development of this system was possible and that conditions could become more favorable sometime after the next 48 hours.

Between now and Nov. 30, the official end of hurricane season, people living in coastal areas will hear the daily tropical weather forecasts. While no one knows for sure if a hurricane will strike in any one location, officials are predicting an above-average season.

The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Climate Prediction Center, a division of the National Weather Service, forecast that 12 to 18 named storms with winds of 39 miles per hour could form this year. They say six to 10 named storms could become hurricanes with winds of 74 mph or higher. Three to six of those storms could become major hurricanes, Category 3, 4 or 5 with winds of 111 mph or higher.

The research team at Colorado State University’s Tropical Meteorology Project continues to predict an above-average season in a June 1 report written by Dr. Phil Klotzbach, research scientist, and William Gray, Professor emeritus of atmospheric science. They predict 16 named storms, nine hurricanes and as many as five major hurricanes will form this season.

The seasonal average is 11 named storms, six hurricanes and two major hurricanes.

Since 1953, Atlantic tropical storms have been named from lists originated by the National Hurricane Center and now maintained and updated by an international committee of the World Meteorological Organization.

2011 storm names are: Arlene, Bret, Cindy, Don, Emily, Franklin, Gert, Harvey, Irene, Jose, Katia, Lee, Maria, Nate, Ophelia, Philippe, Rina, Sean, Tammy, Vince and Whitney.

Officials urged residents to make preparations now and to stay tuned to local weather forecasts throughout the season. For information on hurricane preparation, visit TBNweeekly.com’s hurricane guide. To see the latest hurricane forecasts, visit the tropical weather center.